---
title: Ecclesiastic Musings
author: Austin Jones
layout: page
categories: philosophy Religion
---

<!-- TODO(austin.jones): read the bible before publishing biblical dissections -->

https://cornerstonechapel.net/teaching/20180128/

Firstly, I liked how the guide tore into some etymology. I’ve long loved words as they are the way humans communicate to one and they give use the ability to describe and convey our experience to one another.

Pastor Gary remarks that Ecclesiastes comes from the Greek word ekklesiastes (one who gathers the church) differing from the Hebrew Qohe’leth (teacher/preacher). I find that the Greek translation is very poignant to the describe theme of the book of Ecclesiastes. That is to say, it is described as having a somber, reflective tone. One imagines gathering their loved ones in their twilight years to finally espouse one’s wisdom to those that will follow. At the end of the book “Brave new world” Aldous Huxley quotes Cardinal John Henry Newman to talk about how old men find their way to god; talking about the natural way that the sensationalism of the world fizzles and a man finally turn to god for meaning. Beautifully, I feel like this is expressed in the term Ecclesiastes.

The other term I like was the Hebrew word “hevel” meaning in English “meaningless/vanity” or “vapor/smoke”. Pastor Gary quotes Solomons description of life as “hevel” but goes on to say that it isn’t void of meaning yet more like vapor. Vapor is quick, fleeting, ephemeral nevertheless when you put your hand through it you feel it. It is tangible, if only for the moment. However nauseating, this is what life is. It is in this odd intersection of meaning that “hevel” can describe that we finally pin it down.  Second, it breaks up the ideas in Ecclesiastes into 3 chunks that are pretty summarizing of the human problem of mortality:  Time Is Marching On, Nothing Is Really New, and No One Will Really Be Remembered. If there was a greatest hits of my anxieties right now – these are those. I think it is so because they are unsolvable. Anxiety feeds most effectively on things with no end. As I write this email, time is passing. As I write this email, none of it is new or novel (at least to the world). Once you and I die, no one will remember this email. As Ecclesiastes is a book of the Christian Bible, the text, naturally, proffers God as a solution. Without too much digression, I’m a spiritual person, but maybe not a man of God as it were. That said, I think in my trying to work through the issue of mortality I’ve found similar answers. Pastor Gary says:
 
“God is the only one who brings perspective and value and purpose and meaning. And when he’s not in the equation, you can have it all and accomplish it all and be as empty as empty can be. That’s [Solomon’s] story. [It’s] a wonderful wakeup call for some and [a] reminder to others, of the importance of having God at the center of your life.”
 
For my purposes, I’ll relax “God” to a “higher power”. Nevertheless, this rings very true. It’s easy to feel like you see the whole of a human life, but it’s all too easy to be myopic on a Godly or Cosmic scale. Keeping the good of humanity and the world at the center of your purpose can give you the feeling of serving something. That’s what I find helps the most with my fears of death and oblivion: playing with kids, teaching people how to do things, helping people, making the world better. Do anything more that keeping to myself and working at my own selfish endeavors. Something that I feel is tangentially related to this is why I try to consume more books and less YouTube. I realized that all the time I spent scrolling the internet wasn’t sticking with me – it was ephemeral. When I take the time a book deserves to consume it, then it “sticks with me”. Maybe that point is counter to “No One Will Really Be Remembered” as not long will there be a “me” to which the book can “stick”.   All the same, I’m working through all this still and I doubt I’ll figure it all out lol.
